So now that we've actually seen
how to use the SQL language
to work with SQLites databases,
it's time to see how to do that in Python.
So the Python SQLite3 module that's included with Python
makes it really easy to create
and use SQLite databases.
So let's actually start off by creating
this simple contacts database
that we used in the SQL introduction.
So I'm gonna create a new project here,
Python project, obviously.
And I'm going to call this one createDB.
All right, and I'm going to create a new Python file
by right-clicking the project, new Python file,
and we'll call this one contacts.
And we'll just go full screen here.
Okay.
So we start, going to start by importing the SQLite3 module,
so we type import SQLite,
and you can see that IntelliJ's found it for us,
so we'll use the one that they recommend.
Then we wanna create a connexion to the database.
We'll do db equals sqlite3.connect.
And we're gonna call this one contacts.sqlite.
Now, I've said previously,
that SQLite doesn't care what you call your database,
as long as it's a valid file name, of course,
but there's actually a reason here
why I've used .sqlite as the name,
and we'll see why that is later.
So this line will create the contacts.sqlite database,
if it doesn't already exist.
Otherwise, it will open it for us.
All right, so on the next line, now,
we need to create a table,
and we do that by passing a SQLite statement
to the connexions execute function.
So db.execute,
then we type our SQL.
So create table contacts,
and left parentheses,
we need a name and a type for each of the three fields.
So name, space, text, comma,
phone, space, integer, comma,
and the last one's email, just text.
The right parentheses, and then close the line off.
All right, and we can do the similar thing
by typing db.execute.
This time we can use that to insert a line
instead of record rows.
Insert into, contacts,
where we will put our three fields
in parentheses, separated by commas.
So name, obviously, phone.
IntelliJ's trying to be helpful,
but in this case, it's not really able to do much,
because these values aren't coming from anywhere.
And then values, but noticing
how it's giving us the SQL here,
so values, which is pretty cool.
They want a parentheses, a parentheses here.
They wanna use single quotes here,
because we've got this string already using double quotes.
So we need to, 6545678 there,
and say tim@email.com.
We need to make sure we've got a single quote,
parentheses, a right parentheses, that is,
double quote, and then right parentheses, which we have.
And that should've been like that.
All right, so that's our first line there to,
could now insert a record into the contacts table.
Now I'm gonna insert another row,
but this time, watch what happens as I type.
So db.execute, and double quotes, insert.
Now, what should happen, which does sometimes,
is the IntelliJ lookup will actually start helping us
by giving the, sort of giving us some hints
as to what commands to use,
but you can see in this case,
it hasn't done anything at this point for us,
which isn't very nice.
I thought it might kick in and do that for us,
but we'll try typing a bit more
and see whether it comes back into play again.
So insert into contacts.
Now that was actually trying to give us
the SQL command there, that lookup,
but if I keep typing,
and we'll just go with the three fields, name, phone.
Actually, this time what we'll do,
let's just delete that.
And put a space and put values,
and noticing how it's come up and
put in the keyword values for us automatically.
And I'll just enter the values that we wanna use here,
which will be Brian in single quotes, 1234,
and brian@myemail, email.com again,
separated by single parentheses,
and the whole thing's got parentheses around it
for the value statement,
and then we've got a double quote to close off the string
and a right parentheses to close off the execute function.
Now, we're probably seeing some warnings over here,
so we come over and have a look.
No data sources are configured.
Basically, IntelliJ doesn't have a schema for our database,
so it can't recognise the names
of the columns that we're using,
but don't worry about these warnings for the moment.
We'll come back to those a little bit later.
The last thing I wanna do now,
before we actually run this programme for the first time,
is to close off our database connexions.
We do that with db.close on line eight, like so.
All right, so it should be we've got no errors,
which we haven't, on the screen here.
We can actually run this programme now,
and we should have a table created
with two rows added.
Then we're gonna run it.
We don't get any output,
which is generally a good sign with MySQL
that things have worked.
And I'll just put this down the bottom,
so we can see the output.
All right, so looks like things have worked okay there.
And to verify it, we could switch over to a terminal
and use the SQLite3 command line shell
to check the database,
but we've already seen how to do that,
so let's actually see how to query our database from Python.
Now, there's two ways we can do that.
The usual way, and the way that's common to other languages,
such as Java, for example, is to use a cursor.
Now cursors can be very useful,
so I'm gonna explain about them
before showing you a shortcut way
of doing some of the same things from our connexion.
First, though, we've actually got a problem here.
Now, we can't run the programme again,
because the create table command's going to fail
if we try to execute it again.
Now, we could write code to check
if the table already exists,
but the SQL language has got a slightly different form
of the create table command
that actually copes with this situation.
So we come up here to line four,
and we actually put in some extra wording.
So if, and notice how I've just typed I,
and it's now helpfully saying, yeah,
if not exists, I can press enter or tab there,
and it helpfully adds that to our code.
So as you can imagine,
if the table doesn't already exist,
it's going to create it,
and if it does exist,
it's going to not try and recreate it again,
which is exactly what we want to actually happen here.
All right, so now we can test our code.
So I'm gonna add the code to create a cursor
and use it to run a select query.
And I'll also close the cursor
when we're done with it, to be consistent.
So let's actually start here on line eight.
And we're gonna put cursor equals db.cursor.
And then we want to execute a select query,
so it's cursor.execute,
noting how cursors are executed at db.execute now,
and let's just do a select star from contacts.
And then we can put for row
in cursor, colon, and print row.
And then we wanna do a cursor.close.
All right, so if we run this programme now,
we actually get our two rows printed, as you can see,
on the bottom of the screen in the output window.
Now each row is printed as a tuple
containing a value for each of the columns
in the database.
Now, a database cursor is iterable,
so we can just use a for loop to iterate over the cursor
and print each row, as we've actually done.
And what we could also do, if we wanted to,
we can unpack the tuples as we go,
so we could slightly change the syntax there.
Instead of just for row in cursor,
we can put for name,
phone, email in cursor.
And then we can do print name,
print phone, print email.
And then we can do a separator times 20.
So if we run that revised programme,
you can see we've got our records
unpacked, down the bottom in the output window.
Now one thing you may have noticed
is that I'm not terminating the SQL commands
with a semi-colon.
Now, they're not generally needed
when using the Python 3 SQLite3 module,
and in keeping with the, with the Python philosophy,
you'll find they're generally not used.
In fact, they can often get in the way
if you store a select statement in a string,
and later concatenate a where clause at the end.
You don't wanna have to search for
and remove a trailing semi-colon
at the end of the select statement.
So my recommendation is generally,
don't use semi-colons when using SQL in Python.
(chuckles) I know at this point,
I spent a couple of lectures
getting you into the habit of actually using them,
but they are needed when using SQL in most environments,
so it was a good habit to develop generally,
but you can now relax and stop adding semi-colons
in your SQL statements in Python.
Okay, so our cursor code uses the cursor's execute method
to execute the SQL against the database
and return something that behaves
very much like a list.
So we can iterate over it to process each row,
but it's really not a list.
And if you think about it, a database table
could contain, you know, literally billions of rows.
So if the cursor tried to load them all
into a list in memory,
it's highly likely we'd run out of memory.
So a cursor is what's called a generator.
Now, I'm not gonna go into detail about those now,
but a generator is basically an iterable
that works by generating the next value
each time it's used in Python.
You can create an iterable object
that will return every single possible integer number.
So you could count to infinity
without running out of memory.
Time may be against you, of course,
but memory wouldn't be a problem.
So when our code iterates over the cursor,
it returns the next row from the database
but doesn't actually keep track of previous rows.
Now because it's not really a list,
there's no way to go back to previous records,
and that explains why this next bit of code
doesn't do what we might expect.
And to show you what I mean,
I'm going to actually take a copy of our for loop
up to and including the separator,
and I'm gonna paste that down here,
put another space there.
So looking at this, this, well actually,
let's just run it first.
So it's looking at the output
at the bottom of the screen there.
You may have expected the rows to be printed out again,
but when we get to the second for loop,
the cursors actually run out of rows, so nothing's printed.
The only way to get our cursor to start again
is to actually run the query again.
And what that does, it makes cursors very efficient
when reading data from databases,
because they don't use loads of memory
storing all the records.
Now, sometimes, you may actually want
the entire dataset in a single list,
and rather than using a for loop
to build up your own list,
you can actually use the fetchall method.
All right, so I'm actually gonna delete
that second for loop,
'cause it's not actually doing anything.
And let's actually go above that, that loop.
We'll actually put a space here, actually,
after the execute, anyway, to just
free things up a little bit.
But let's actually just add something to that again,
and put print cursor.fetchall.
All right, so now if I actually run this,
you can see that the fetchall has returned a list
containing a tuple for each row in the database.
So it is possible to get all the rows
from a database into a list,
and then you can actually move backwards and forwards
through the items in the list.
Because all the data's being retrieved
from the cursor by the fetchall method,
our for loop, though, in this particular case, on line 13,
hasn't got anything to print.
Now, there's also a fetchone method
that returns the next row in the cursor.
And to get that to work,
we'll have to come in out the call the fetchall.
So we'll do that first.
And then we can actually change our code a little bit,
up here, and we can put print cursor.fetchone.
Let's just duplicate that another two times.
And if we actually run this,
so you can see what happened there.
The first two times, it returned what was the current row,
then moved on to the next one,
but the third call, call to fetchone, results in none,
and that's because there's no rows left to fetch.
So fetchone is quite useful,
and we're gonna be using that a bit later,
when we wanna retrieve a single row
based on its ID.
All right, so I'm gonna finish the video here now.
In the next video, we're gonna look at that shortcut
that I mentioned earlier in this video,
so I'll see you in the next video.